---
layout: post-minibo
header-img: ''
title: 推特内容精选
subtitle: Extract of Baron's Twitter, 2018-2022
description:	最后更新时间 2022.Feb.9
permalink: extract-twitter-2018-2022
published: true
date: 2023-02-09
author: GreatBaron
tags:
- Archive
---

## 2022
- November.25 Quo usque tandem abutere, CoroVire, patientia nostra? (pay homage to Cicero)
- August.10-11 A day of destruction of the American justice. --- The Biden adminstration has done far more damage to the U.S. constitution than any previous administration, or even more than all governments combined.
- July.18 Hic mundus est non fabula delusionalis.
- June.25 on the case of Roe vs. Wade: We donnt talk about the abortion just about the system of laws. I think the Supreme Court has done the right thing. Some things should be left to the legislature branch to do. This is the issue of state autonomy in the United States. The last decree of homosexual marriage was actually a seemingly progressive ultra vires, but in essence a great violation to the American state and state rights.The responsibility of the Supreme Court the Constitution grants to it is to uphold the law,not to create it. --- It is why D.Trump said it is a "Constitutional Victory"
- June.22 [Q] A lady asked Franklin:"Well doctor, what have we got-- a Republic or a Monarchy?". Franklin replied:" A Republic, if you can keep it." ~The American Review, v.11,p.618. At the close of the Constitutional Convention of 1787
- June.12 Without the dark[ness], we'd never see the stars.
- June.11 Magnum donum patria confert et boni multi sunt.(trans.国有大赉，善人是富)
- May.25 Non semper nihil obtineo.
- May.10 [Q] Andábamos sin buscarnos pero sabiendo que andábamos para encontrarnos. ~Julio Cortázar (We went out not looking for each other, but knowing that we were out to find each other.)
- May.6 Although I'm not an advocative of abortion-ban, the power of review on jurisdiction, interpretating and governing the laws, which is granted to theSupreme Court by the Constitution, shall be respected. That  plays a very important role in the check and balance of US. Four y[ear]s ago I said Supreme Court "do too much exceeding and radical performance in normal civil right telling" at that time I meant the legalization of homosexuality. Now it is about to suffering the fruit of "too much" 
- April.28 So little pains do the the vulgar take in the investigation of truth, accepting readily the first story that comes to hand. ~ Thucydides, Pelo. I-1.20-[3]
- April.26. [Q.vide OneNote-Quote] The best way to rule the peasantry is keeping them satisfied away from starvation yet starved away from satisfaction. ~ Tokugawa Ieyasu
- April.23 Rumor or not is not about the fact but the authority.
- April.18 The wepon of sanction cannot, of course, replace sanction of the weapon... [pay homage to K.Marx]
- April.17 When the people have no right to vote by their hands or voice, they vote by their feet. And if by this also have no, by uteri.
- April.9 [Q, Re:T.Holland] "Of the tens of millions of words that come down to us from classical antiquity, none, so far as we know, was composed by a slave while he was a slave." - Richard Jenkyns
- April.9 [Q] Every society honors its live comformists and its dead troublemakers. ~ Mignon McLauglin, The Complete Neurotics's Notebook, 1981.
- April.8 I do not currently or perpetually possess the necessity to need an accession of romance. It is the refuge for the weak.
- Mar.24 [Re:T.Holland] "A people remarkable foe the contempt they show everything that is holy" - Pliny on the Jews
- Mar.18 [Re:Brianne] My 8yo daughter met a girl at summer camp last year named "Internet." I said no way, that can't be her name but my daughter has been adamant. For almost a year we've been having this discussion. ANTOINETTE. I just found out her name is Antoinette.
- Mar.15 I thought that is not "murder", but "execute" [on the assassination of  Ides March]
- Mar.12 [Re:T.Holland] "Exceptionally admirable creatures" - Pliny on spiders
## 2021
- Dec.30 Dura sunt iura fatorum: interfectus est miles pius, vivit impius. Sic semper erit.
- Dec.8 Cicero is tier-one rhetorician, a tier-two philisophier and tier-three politician. His aptimate eloquence made him a high political position tah dose not match his true ability. While his philosophy pushed him to face the death without fear.
- Nov.27 I sell my whole soul to you, including its eccentricity, its recalcitrance, its capriciousness and tons of foibles. It's so terrible and annoying. But with only one merit, that is , loving you.
- Nov.18 Diarrhea if drink coffee and constipate if not.
- Oct.30 [Q:L.Annaeus Seneca] "Poor is not the person who has too little, but the person who craves more."
- Oct.30 We donnot need a Halloween, for those human beings around us were "inferior" enough.
- Oct.29 Accepting a person to kiss is difficult than accepting one to have sex with. Therefore numerous women close thier eyes when the partner kisses her.
- Aug.13 [Q:Voltaire] "I want my lawyer, my tailor, my servants, even my wife to believe in God, for I think that then I shall be robbe & cuckolded less often."
- Aug.8 [Q] Omnis vita supplicium est. ~ Seneca, Ad Polybium de Consolatione, IX, 6.
- Mar.13 [Q] If you work for a living, why do you kill youself working? ~ the Good, the Bad and the Ugly
- Mar.6 [Q] Auferre trucidare rapere falsis nominibus imperium, atque ubi solitudinem faciunt, pacem appellant. ~ Calgacus, via Tacitus, De Vita Agricolae, XXX
- Mar.6 [Q] Si hortum in bibliotheca habes, deerit nihil. ~ Cicero, Epistulae ad Familiares, IX:IV
- Feb.14 Perhaps the Juris Test has already become the Moby Dick of me.
- Feb.11 [Q] Quote linguas calles, tot homines vales. ~ Karl V of Habsburg
- Jan.25 [Q] This world could not have been the work of an all-loving being, but that of a devil, who had brought creatures into existence in order to delight in the sight of their sufferings. ~ Schopenhuaer
- Jan.23 Those who long for messiah, imperator and iusti domini, definitely degenerate into slaves, lambs and sacrifice.
- Jan.9 [Q] "I must speak the truth, and nothing but truth." ~ Cervantes, Don Quixote. Part I, Book IV, Chapter III
- Jan.7 The most of men in this world are long to only two things: the sex and the violence. You would create the most popular work if you fixed those two together sufficiently.
## 2020
- Nov.9 Fiat iustitia, et pereat America.
- Nov.7 Ama libertatem; Quaere veritatem; Mane modestus
- Nov.7 I had found the similarity of Roman republic and US for a long [Re.M.Beard]
- Oct.25 Felipe I(el Hermoso) is not a good marido, for he hurts Juana so much
- Oct.12 Fiat iustitia, et pereat mundus. ~motto of House of Habsburg
- Oct.9 Is Roman Republic the spiritual past-life of America?
- Sept.19 Obit anus, melius ius.
- Sept.9 [My first Latin senryu] Teneo amica, habet landica longa, et est ea pulchra.
- Jul.12 "To cheat boys with knuckle-bones, but men with oaths." --Lysander (Plutarch, Life of Lysander, 8-4)
- Jul.6 Cognoscetis veritatem et veritas liberabit vos.(Vulgata, Iohannes 8:32)
- Jul.5 Useless laws weaken the necessary laws.(Montesquieu)
- Jun.14 Optimism is cowardice. Oswald Spengler, 1931 Men and Technics
- Jun.13 Ihad expected the "Great Cultural Revolution" to return, but I had never expected it was in the United States
- Jun.7 "Niggers seem to going to perish everything beautiful or tranditional, Nigger is cancer of this world" -- One of my friends
- Jun.2 this world is odd: Dtrump's twitter = violence;bang, to rob and to burn in the street = speech
- May.29 everything trivial in the life can overwhelmingly crush me
- Feb.8 "The difference between treason and patriotism is only a matter of dates." ——Alexandre Dumas, the Count of Monte Cristo
- Jan.24 It is a start of life-long-agony to save money
- Jan.13 Pax pulchra est, autem non longa, ergo si vis pacem, para bellum.
- Jan.5 I love Anki
## 2019
- Dec.25 I am more an antique Roman than a Sina
- Dec.24 Those who wants to undermine democracy always advocates Confucianism first.
- Dec.9 The essential element in the black art of obscurantism is not that it wants to darken individual understanding, but that it wants to blacken our picture of the world, and darken our idea of existence.（Nietzsche）
- Dec.7 The difference between religion and philosophy is that facing dolorous reality, the religion creates beautiful imagination while philosophy shall destroy those unreal imaginations
- Nov.29 Vitae dura despicio!
- Nov.28 Et jamais je n'ai senti, si avant, à la fois mon détachement de moi-même et ma présence au monde. (Albert Camus)
- Sept.10 The life is like a pendulum, reciprocating between void and exhaustion.
- Sept.3 Nonne amas me, Fortuna?
- Sept.3 you rule, dic*tator [Re.PornHub] What do you get when you cross a penis and potato? A dicktator. lol date me.
- Sept.2 Deceiving chiledren with games and deceiving adults with lies is not evil.
- Sept.1 Your Twi is always so philosophical in existentialism [Re.PornHub] You can't put a flower into an asshole and call it a vase.
- Aug.29 exhauuuuuuuuusting [Re.PornHub] Being alive is exhausting. 
- Aug.19 As long as your imagination is sumptuous enough, you were able to see anybody's nude by apodyopsising.
- Aug.19 Compared to our relatively limited time, energy and money, the girls of this world are infinite . It's obviously dangerous using what limited to reach what infinite . For this, we should 1) not copulate girls or 2) only copulate rich girls
- Aug.18 "If Roman people have to learn Latin first, maybe they have no time to conquer the world."
- Aug.18 The teunami in an adult's heart is quiet and unknown to anyone.
- Aug.17 [Re.PornHub] the best way to save money is to die. 
- Aug.17 Roman history is always giving us big lessons [Re.M.Beard]
- Aug.16 In education we are not striving to teach the young to make a living, but make a life.
- Aug.15 Youc ould cut all flowers but you cannot keep the spring from coming.
- Aug.14 With jewelry dress you up is inferior to equip yourself with knowledge.
- Jun.30 Si vis pacem, para bellum.
- Jun.28 Pacis hypocritam despicio.
## 2018
- Dec.10 Too much ignorant people in Sina is delighted by sino-us trade war . They are fantasying that usa could force our country to change her political environment . They are WRONG cos that no country could become democratic without effort from her own people.
- Nov.19 [Re.@kebayf] introductory french lesson: hello, my name is katie. I'm 22 and I like the colour pink introductory latin lesson: the foulest type of magic is conjuration, for it can be fatal. the conjurer sends out demons like rapacious lions who seek to devour the souls of the faithful
- Oct.16 自由与奴役之间不存在一条清晰的界限自由与奴役是相对的可以互相转换的 当自由超过了社会能够提供的范围人民不遵守法律道德和勇气衰落秩序混乱每个人都会生活在自由的奴役中 当奴役久了人民习惯了做奴才就会为奴役辩护认为那是他们生存的必要条件最后热爱自由的人死掉的时候奴役也变成一种奴隶们的自由
- Sept.24 To live in slavery or to die for liberty. Is that a question?
- Sept.3 [vide skt. Learing history is useless]
- Sept.3 Lie to a few people, you will be a liar. But lie to a lot of people, you will be a prophet.
- Sept.1 [vide skt. meantioning Greco-Roman]
- Aug.31 It's an extreme pleasure to watch those who didn't  listen my advice suffering the pain of my prophecy.
- Aug.7 铜驼飘摇多少日，化作谁说六朝事。

